mistakes are ubiquitous
error is always with us the whole
purpose of creating knowledge is to
correct
errors we cannot have certainty about
anything ever
but at the same time this does not mean
that all claims to truth are on equal
footing
relativism the idea that all claims to
truth are equal
that everyone's opinion has equal value
is false
science mathematics philosophy and
morality uncover objective truth
about reality what most people think it
means
if something is objectively true this
does not mean it is
certainly true pause for a moment
what does certain mean if i'm certain
what does that mean
it just means i feel some way i feel
certain
certainty is an emotion it's a feeling
you get
or at least a feeling some people seem
to want to have but a feeling
the feeling that you are definitely
without a doubt correct
is no guarantee that you are you should
have doubts
doubt is good someone without doubt is
dogmatic
and dogmatism only ever leads to evil
do you remember the time when you were
certain
that through any two points only a
single straight line can be drawn
perhaps you still are depending upon how
much math you remember
so perhaps try it now draw two random
points anywhere on a piece of paper
and draw a straight line through those
two points
can you draw more than one line through
those two points
have you tried think a little
it's said only one line can be drawn
through those two points
indeed euclid who first laid down our
mathematical foundations of geometry
provided a rock solid mathematical proof
of this
and this is what you are taught in
school geometry class
so there's a proof but are you certain
of so
simple a truth most people are certain
at least for some time
that only one such straight line can be
drawn
but now bend the piece of paper
or wrap the paper around the ball
suddenly infinitely more straight lines
can be drawn
your prior certainty is undermined by a
simple change of perspective
but maybe you have objections now you
still refuse to accept this
that's cheating or some such the line is
bent
the point here is do you doubt it should
you doubt it
did you misunderstand the instruction as
i first posed it
to draw a straight line through those
two points
could i have phrased it in such a way as
to not be misunderstood by you
karl popper once said it is impossible
to speak in such a way that you cannot
be misunderstood
so it is with all knowledge we always
have doubts we can always
misunderstand we can never be certain so
when someone says
i know x where x is any claim at all
what they're not in actuality saying is
i am
certain that x is the case or even i am
justified in believing that x
no what they actually mean is the best
idea i have at the moment is x and i've
got no good criticism of x
when people say they know x they're not
saying they can't actually change their
mind
yes of course some people are dogmatists
and claim not to doubt x when x is
either something really obvious
or something that is really important to
them but they're thinking these things
does not change the true structure of
knowledge
or that they are in fact actually
fallible humans people are always
fallible
we should know that even if they claim
to have no doubts
we should doubt that very claim or
better yet understand that if they
thought better about things than they
would like us
understand that although knowledge is
genuinely possible the feeling that one
is certain
is no guarantee at all that one is in
possession of the final
ultimate truth that final ultimate truth
is something we aim for
but it's not something we can ever know
to have obtained
the justified true belief mistake handed
down to us from plato
remains deeply ingrained in our language
and ways of thinking about knowledge
but it's just that a mistake knowledge
isn't anything to do with being
justified true
which is to say in some way finally
shown to be not possibly false
or even about the beliefs of people
knowledge instead
is very much a real thing abstract
and yet instantiated in physical objects
in other words
physical structures are arranged in
particular ways in order to
code the knowledge so for example brains
encode knowledge but so
too do computers and even telescopes all
these structures encode
causal relationships between objects so
that something useful can be done
with the information popper understood
that knowledge is real and possible
but many people think he rejected
knowledge because they think his entire
philosophy
is about falsificationism so they think
poppa's philosophy says something like
you can be sure about those things you
were falsified but not about anything
else
or something like that but this is wide
of the mark completely
papa did not think you could be sure as
in certain or absolutely 100 without any
doubts for all time satisfied
that anything was true or false
no he didn't believe in confidence
levels at all
everything we know is always conjectural
which is to say
tentative it contains truth
but it's not the final truth knowledge
claims our explanations about what is
true
falsification or refutation more broadly
rules out some explanations theories
ideas hypotheses
as being good explanations david deutsch
sharpened up this idea even more
an experimental refutation makes a
theory almost impossible to vary
in such a way as to account for the
refutation
in other words if your favorite
beautiful theory is slain by an ugly
fact
then if the theory is any good you
shouldn't be able to change it just a
little bit in order to now explain what
went wrong
for example if you think eating a
kilogram of grass
cures the common cold and someone tries
and it doesn't work
so your theory is falsified then if you
come back with
oh actually it's probably more like 1.1
kilograms let's try again
this is called an ad hoc modification
making your theory
easy to vary and so we can reject the
grass cures the cold theory and all
infinite variants of it
on that basis we don't have to keep
testing it and it's fair for us to say
we know that grass doesn't cure the
common cold does this mean we're sure
that it doesn't
that we're certain one day someone won't
come along and show how if you isolate
some chemical in grass
and add it to some other chemical in
alcohol and take it as a pill that this
won't
kill cold viruses no we can never be
sure
but we've no reason whatever to think
that this is or ever will be
the case papa was never a skeptic in the
philosophical sense of the word
quite the opposite skeptics believe in
the justified true belief theory of
knowledge
they rightly conclude one can never be
absolutely certain about knowledge
claims but then
wrongly conclude this means knowledge is
not possible
papa was a critic of this idea he
rejected it completely
he threw it away root and branch and
started from the ground up
the idea here is to divorce knowledge
from being about certainties or
justified truth
instead knowledge is possible because
there is an objective difference between
knowledge claims none of them are final
absolutes
but in almost all cases always where
there are two or more competing claims
one of them is better than the other the
process of criticism rules out all
but one of the ideas ideally of the one
that survives we say
i know that that claim comes to be
called part of our knowledge of the
world
but it's always revisable always
improvable papa was no skeptic about
knowledge
he was a critic and these are quite
different things one of them assumes
knowledge is not possible
because certainty isn't the other the
critical idea
says almost exactly the opposite the
pursuit of knowledge and its objective
growth and improvement is only possible
because certainty is not to unpack this
a little more
if we were able to be certain then this
would mean we'd have direct
access to final truth and this would
mean the quest for knowledge would stop
we'd just tap into that ultimate source
of truth and that would be that
game over we'd never improve anything
because we'd have the final complete
answer
and all the answers so the pursuit of
knowledge would stop
but happily the pursuit of knowledge
isn't like this at all knowledge is hard
won
and it comes to us with much
misconception almost all we know
contains
misconception and we can never be sure
which is misconception
and which is truth but that doesn't
matter
as long as our process of error
correction keeps on sifting the
misconceptions from the kernels of truth
so that we make progress this is all we
need to be able to say
we are creating knowledge or we are
learning and making objective progress
we can't know we've got the final truth
ever but what we can know
is that our process of criticism
experimental falsification
and other kinds of refutation make the
ideas that survive this process
objectively better
than the ideas that do not the purpose
of science is to correct our knowledge
about physical reality
here we see improvements most obviously
perhaps objective progress seems to be
made
all the time new medical discoveries
improve our health and lengthen our
lives and cure disease
previously of that sentence each new
iphone is better than the one that went
before
and each new car engine is more
efficient than previous models
one great theory is overturned by
another even better theory
new explanations replace old ones the
new ones are not certainly true
but just closer to the so-called
ontological truth
when compared with its rivals karl
popper called this
verisilimitude this means closeness to
truth whereby
truth we mean ontological truth what
does that mean
ontological truth is a description of
what is really there
we do not have a method for finding a
final once and for all description of
what is really out there but this is a
wonderful thing
it means that the quest for knowledge is
infinite we make progress
forever we don't find a final fact about
reality
and just stop and say well that's it no
more needs to be known about this
we now know everything there is to know
about this that day
happily will never come we can always
improve things
this means we must try to show which of
our ideas are wrong and how
and so this is the best thing you can do
to help progress along
you don't need to be a great philosopher
a quick thinking mathematician or a
creative scientist
you just need to be a little more
critical critics have a bad reputation
and they don't deserve it
there are two equally important ways to
be in the world when it comes to
progress
you can be a creator and you can be a
critic
we are both all of these at various
times and both are absolutely essential
to creating knowledge
creation can result in improvements and
that's great producing something new can
be exhilarating
but that again is just a feeling just
because you're excited about a new
creation doesn't mean you've actually
produced something of value
you can be wrong remember you might very
well be right about your new creation
you'll earn fame or money or social
cachet
your new idea will spread some new art
more beautiful or more incisive might
make you rich or famous some new
scientific theory
to overturn an old theory could solve a
problem previously a stumbling block to
progress might even improve the world
but sometimes new creations that lead to
dead ends
that's just part of the creative process
creating stuff that doesn't do what you
want it to
art that's just not good music no one
will listen to
a painting everyone says is derivative a
scientific theory quickly slain by an
experiment that shows it to be wrong
a computer game no one wants to play
criticism
is how we sift the good the beautiful
the true
the useful from the bad the ugly the
false and the damaging
and this is true for ideas generally and
for your own ideas personally
criticize your own ideas and don't be
upset when others criticize your ideas
they're not criticizing you
personally you are not your ideas you
merely have
ideas you can discard ideas and you can
criticize the criticisms
you can defend your ideas that's good
too if you want to get better
as fast as possible create criticize
and repeat that's the way to make
progress